The gentleman said: learning can't stop.Green is extracted from bluegrass, but it is bluer than bluegrass; Ice, made of water, is colder than water. The wood is straight and in line with the ink line. It is considered that the curvature of the wood meets the general standard of (round to) as round as a plan. Even if it is dried again, it won't be straight any more. Therefore, the wood becomes straight after being compared with the ink line, and the metal sword can become sharp when it is polished on the grindstone. A gentleman studies extensively and examines and reflects on himself every day, then he will be wise and reasonable and have no fault in his behavior.Therefore, if you don't climb the mountain, you don't know the height of the sky; Without overlooking the deep valley, you don't know the massiness of the earth; Without listening to the teachings of the former king, you don't know the breadth of knowledge. The sons of Gan, Yue, Yi and raccoon are born with the same voice and different customs. Education makes them so. The poem says, "you gentleman, don't covet comfort and do nothing. You should be respectful, loyal to your duties and be close to and accompany honest people. The gods will hear all this and give you great blessings and auspicious." God has no law of change, and there is nothing better than no disaster. (this textbook does not)I've been thinking hard all day, but it's not as good as the knowledge I learned in a moment; I used to stand on tiptoe and look into the distance, but I didn't see as much as I saw from a high place. When he ascended to a high place and waved, his arms were not lengthened, but people in the distance could see him; Shouting along the wind, the voice did not increase, but the listener could hear it clearly. With the help of chariots and horses, people don't walk fast, but they can reach thousands of miles away; People who use boats are not good at swimming, but they can cross the Yangtze River and the Yellow River. The quality and disposition of a gentleman is no different from that of ordinary people. It's just that a gentleman is good at using foreign things.There is a bird in the south, called Mongolian dove, which makes a nest with feathers, and the development of weaving is tied to the reed. When the wind breaks the reed, the egg breaks and the son dies. The nest is not imperfect, the reason. In the west, there is a kind of grass called Shegan. Its stem is four inches long. It grows on high mountains and faces ten thousand feet of abyss. The wooden stem can't grow. The reason is established. Peng grass grows in the marijuana field, without support, naturally straight; The white sand mixed into the black soil and became as black as the black soil. The root of LAN Huai is Zhi. Gradually, the gentleman doesn't approach and the people don't obey. Its essence is not bad, the reason for its development. Therefore, when a gentleman lives, he must choose the countryside and be accepted by others to approach the right path in order to prevent evil.There must be a beginning for the occurrence of all kinds of things. Honor and disgrace must come like his virtue. Meat rots and maggots, and fish worms. If you neglect and forget yourself, disaster will happen. Force yourself to take the column, and Gao Rou takes one by herself. Evil and filthy things were in his body, which he complained about. Use firewood, fire to dry, flat, water to wet. Plants grow and animals flock together, each according to its kind. So the essence of Zhang, and the bow and arrow came; The trees were luxuriant, but they were cut down with an axe; The trees give shade while the birds rest. Acetic acid, and mosquitoes gathered. Therefore, there are disasters and disgraces. Should a gentleman be careful of his station! (this textbook does not)The accumulated earth and rock became a high mountain, and the wind and rain rose from here; When the accumulated water became an abyss, the Dragon came into being; Accumulate good deeds and develop noble morality, while the gods are complacent and the heart of saints is ready.Therefore, there is no way to reach a place thousands of miles away without accumulating a step-by-step journey; If there is no confluence of streams, there is no way to merge into rivers and seas. A good horse leaps less than ten steps; A bad horse pulls a cart for ten days, and its performance comes from walking continuously. If you cut a few times and stop, the rotten wood will be cut continuously; If you keep carving, gold and stone can also be carved successfully. Earthworms have no sharp claws and teeth, strong muscles and bones, but they can eat the soil up and drink the water in the soil down. This is because they are dedicated. A crab has six legs and two claws. If there is no cave for snakes and eels, it has nowhere to live. This is because it is impetuous.Therefore, those who have no dark thoughts are not significant; Don't worry about things, there is no outstanding merit. You can't serve two people until you walk down the street. The eyes cannot see at the same time, and the ears cannot hear at the same time. The snake has no feet but flies. The rat has five skills but is poor. The poem says: "the cuckoo is in the mulberry, and the seven birds feed carefully. A good gentleman with good character is dignified and consistent. He is dignified and consistent, and his inner integrity is as firm as a rock!" so the gentleman focuses on one point.Once upon a time, Hu Ba played drums and harps, but fish came out to listen; Boya played the piano and six horses raised their heads to feed. Therefore, the voice is not small, do not know, the line is not hidden but not shaped. Jade is moistened by the mountains and plants, and deep beads are born on the cliffs without withering. Why not accumulate good? What don't you know?How does learning begin? Where does it end? He said: these began with chanting scriptures and finally read rites; Its significance begins to be a man, to become a saint, really accumulate strength, long-term income, and stop learning after death. So learning numbers has an end, if their meaning can't be left in a moment. Yes, human; Give up, animal. Therefore, it is written according to the rules of politics; The poet, where the voice in the poem stops; The man of rites, the great part of law, is similar to the principle of discipline. So learning the ritual stopped. This is a code of ethics. Courtesy, respect for literature, happiness and neutralization, the extensive of poetry and books, and the performance of spring and autumn ended between heaven and earth. The knowledge of a gentleman comes into the ear, in his heart, in his limbs and in his behavior. It is a rule that can be done. Villain's learning method, into the ear, from the mouth; Between the mouth and ears, it's only four inches. Why is it enough to make a seven foot body beautiful! The ancients studied for themselves, but now people study for others. The learning of a gentleman, because beauty itself; The villain's learning method considers the bird calf. So don't ask, just tell him he's arrogant. Ask one and tell the two pairs. Arrogance, wrong, wrong; If the gentleman goes.There is no better way to learn than to approach him. The rites, music and laws are not happy, the poems and books are not cut, and the spring and Autumn period is not happy. When they learn the theory of gentleman, you have used it all over the world. Therefore, there is no better way to learn than to approach him.Didn't the way to learn like him soon, Longli followed. People who can't like him can't Longli. Ante will learn all kinds of knowledge and follow poetry and books. In that case, people can't help but be shallow Confucian scholars all year round. The original king, benevolence and righteousness, etiquette will correct the planning path. If you wear a leather collar and bend your fingers, there are countless smooth ones. Those who do not obey the etiquette and write in poetry are like those who measure the river with their fingers, those who use the broomcorn with the spear, and those who use the conical canteen. You can't get him. So long Li, although he doesn't understand, the method is not human; No Longli, although he is observant and eloquent, he scattered Confucianism.Ask the gun, don't tell you; Don't ask about the measures reported; Don't listen to the gun. If someone is arguing, don't argue with him. Therefore, it must be connected from its path to and then; It's not his way to avoid. So Li Gong, then you can talk to him about the way of Tao; Ci Shun, and then you can talk to him about the truth of Tao; Color can talk to him about the expression of Tao. So you can't talk to him, the so-called pride; You can tell him without telling him, the so-called hiding; Without looking at his face, he said to the blind. Therefore, a gentleman is not proud, does not hide, and is not blind. I learn from him. The poem says, "if you don't make friends, you won't be comfortable. The son of heaven is me." that's what it means.A hundred mistakes are not worth shooting at; If you can't walk a thousand miles, it's not worth being good at driving; Ethics is different, benevolence and righteousness are different, so we can't say that we are good at learning. Those who study insist on learning one. One out, one in, people in the streets; There are few good ones and many bad ones. Jie and Zhou stole Zhi; Complete, complete, and then learn the role.The gentleman knows that the incomplete and impure deficiency will be beautiful, so he recites it for a long time and thinks through it. When the person takes the place and removes their scourge, he will maintain it. So that the eyes do not want to see, so that the ears do not want to hear, so that the population does not want to say what is not correct, so that the heart does not want to think. When it comes to the good, look at the color you like, the five tones you like, the five tastes you like, and the heart has the world. Therefore, rights cannot be overridden, we cannot change, and the world cannot be shaken. Born like this, die? Therefore, this is called ethics. Ethics can only be determined, can be determined, and then respond. It's about adults. When I saw him the next day, the ground was covered by his light, and the gentleman valued his integrity.